[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
For those among you
who have not studied and used
ayahuasca and toad medicine,
Rak Razam has filled his
experiences in the Amazonian
jungle and brought it
back to share with us.
We're going to talk about
that and a whole lot
more about the whole notion
of expanding consciousness
that's rising to the surface
now in the year 2017.
It actually started
prior to this,
but let's go back even further.
What's interesting to me
about all of the-- it's
a different kind
of medicine that's
rising to the surface
from the '60s and '70s.
Astrologically, the
time we're in right now
is really reflecting
the revolutionary time
of the '60s, where
recreational drug use really
came into popular use.
And can you just kind of
tie these periods together
and what you feel is surfacing
within the human psyche that's
calling out.
>>RAK RAZAM: Thank you, Regina.
Essentially, what's
coming back now
full circle isn't something new.
It's something very, very old.
It's something which Western
culture over the last 500,000
to few thousands of
years, because, I guess,
of a bias with religion and
different sort of conflicting,
you know, belief systems, saw
these indigenous tribes, which
used plant medicines,
which alter consciousness
as the work of the devil,
things like that, you know.
But these cultures have been
caretakers for plant medicines,
which can change consciousness.
We call this entheogens
nowadays from the Greek,
"to invoke the divine within."
And there are things
which tribal peoples
have been caretakers for for
millennia, time immemorial.
And these substances, when we
take them in the right context,
and in tribal cultures, they
don't do things recreationally
in this context.
They use these
substances as medicines
specifically for initiations
and to help mediate the energy
and the psyche of
their tribe to keep
them connected to the web of
life and to the planet herself.
And they understand that
the planet, Mother Gaia, she
secretes these substances.
And they have very
specific relationships,
we know now with neurochemistry,
with our own brain structure.
And they've done lots
of tests with EG and MRI
in recent years looking at the
legalization and medicalization
of these substances.
And they understand
they switch off
different aspects of
our default mode network
of the brain, which are
involved in the sense of ego.
And they bring us back.
When that's reduced, they
bring our consciousness
to a more unified and organic
sort of unfolding with nature.
That's on a scientific level.
So tribal people have
had these medicines,
and it's part of
what keeps them,
I think, in synergy
with the earth.
So Western culture started
to sever that connection,
that relationship
with the planet
and the psychoactive medicines
hundreds, if not thousands,
of years ago.
And because of that, we've
had a vacuum in our culture,
and we've pretty much killed
off the idea of the medicine
person, the wise man or woman,
the herbalist, the witches,
the warlocks, and the shamans.
And coincidentally, without
that mediation of the plants
and our relationship
with the plants,
we've also lost our
relationship with nature,
and we've seen it as
something separate
from ourselves that we just
take from as a commodity.
And the cumulative effect
over many hundreds of years
is this peak of empire
and of Western culture
we have now, which is in
a planetary emergency.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>RAZAM: Because we didn't
have this relationship
with the planet.
So what happened
back in the '60s,
coming on from some discoveries
in the laboratory in the '40s,
was this-- essentially,
one of the main drivers
was this chemical LSD,
which was made by a lab
by Albert Hoffman, a Swiss
chemist in the 1940s,
and is one molecule
different from LSA,
or morning glory seeds, which
are used in Mesoamerica.
It's just one molecule.
Essentially, it's the same,
but it's made in a laboratory.
But on some level, if you
look at those hundreds,
if not thousands, of
years of disconnection
from the planet that we had
in the West and this rise
of hierarchy and
empire and culture,
which has created this battery
farm of global consciousness,
where we're all in these
systems, which are, perhaps,
not as nurturing or equitable
or loving as we would hope we
could be on the
planet, something
had to give, because energy
can't be created or destroyed.
And so a suppression of our
connection to our spirituality
within and our connection to
the planetary spirituality--
that has built up over time.
And I think now we're seeing it.
It came out in the '60s,
and it came out of a lab.
But essentially, it
was one generation
taking the brunt of the
psychic buildup of history
that had been suppressed of
this reconnection to spirit.
>>REGINA: There was a lot
of weed at the time, too,
and now we see
what has happened.
The progression of what's
happened with marijuana
is just one of
Earth's offerings.
>>RAZAM: Definitely.
So marijuana is actually
another sacramental plant used
by many different
cultures, but what
we've been discovering in modern
shamanic culture in the West
is that it's not just these
medicines or these psychedelics
or the substances.
It's the relationship
we have with them.
So in the West, because we
didn't have tribal guidance
or support to understand how
to take mind-altering things,
we had people crop up.
We had Ken Kesey.
We had Tim Leary.
We had Allen Ginsburg.
We had leaders in their
fields, who were like,
these substances,
the psychedelics,
LSD are profoundly altering
human consciousness,
and they have a capacity
to help us expand,
to reconnect, to really
move forward as a species.
But it created an equal
and opposite pressure
from the establishment,
because it was actually
a cultural revolution.
So it was a threat to the
powers that be in the paradigm.
But underneath that, what
I believe was happening
was this reclamation to spirit
and to expanded awareness that
had been building up over the
course of our disconnection
for hundreds of years.
And so it came through the
labs, and now the stepping stone
has been from the '60s
with the LSD revolution,
which opened their minds.
Then there was an '80s
revolution with ecstasy,
which actually was actually--
>>REGINA: And loads of cocaine--
>>RAZAM: Well--
>>REGINA: '80s and '90s.
>>RAZAM: There's
different [INAUDIBLE ]..
You know, I like
to say that they--
>>REGINA: Crack, cocaine.
>>RAZAM: Well, they
say a culture gets
the politician it deserves.
Well, I think it also gets the
stimulants or the chemicals
or the sacraments that it needs.
>>REGINA: Yeah, the drugs
that it deserves, yeah.
>>RAZAM: So we've mentioned
things like crack and cocaine
and the ice epidemic
around the world.
Lots of these substances
are politically motivated,
and as agendas of
social control,
has been really well-documented
in the drug wars--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>RAZAM: --where crack
cocaine and things like that
were saturated into
African-American neighborhoods
in the '70s.
>>REGINA: Or Southeast Asia.
>>RAZAM: To destabilize the
community cultural structures.
>>REGINA: But then it was
taken on as the drug of choice
by upper income,
like Wall Street.
>>RAZAM: You know what you've
always got to ask is, cui bono?
Who profits?
Any culture that is
fair and equitable
and lives under
this understanding
that there is a freedom
of your own consciousness
and the whole American
revolution and Constitution,
and you have the right
to certain states
of being, certain inalienable
rights to freedom,
and that it should include
of consciousness itself,
it's not a legal thing.
It's more of a
cultural control thing.
Why do we get the drugs
we get when we get them?
So the cocaines
and the body drugs,
which keep us stimulated--
coffee, alcohol, cocaine,
things like that.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>RAZAM: But why did they ban
marijuana for like 60 years?
Because not only
does it calm down,
and it's been proven to have
so many medical benefits,
but actually, it not
just makes you feel good,
but it relaxes the tension of
our culture and our stress.
In indigenous cultures,
where marijuana
has been used sacramentally,
it also, I believe,
has a plant spirit
attached to it.
So the danger, which I
see in Western culture,
is there's a permissibility
happening now for psychedelics
and certain stimulants
and drugs to be
legalized or de-classified
and decriminalized,
made recreational.
But what would that do to us?
Without the understanding
of ceremony,
of ritual, of right usage
of these substances--
>>REGINA: Well, it's, for
example, in some circles,
it's stated that the new
move to legalize marijuana
across the country is taking
us into a brave new world
type of society and soma.
It's been called soma.
>>RAZAM: You may have
seen in the feeds there's
mock-up pictures of Monsanto
marijuana cigarettes.
That's where it could go, right?
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>RAZAM: But one
thing I want to say
about the '60s, the difference
in indigenous tribal cultures,
which in the West, we have a
sort of monoculture approach
to consciousness.
You have this level
of consciousness.
You go to work.
You do certain things.
You have some uppers and downers
to put brakes or accelerators
on consciousness,
and then you go home.
And you keep it on an even keel.
Indigenous cultures
around the world
understand a multiplicity
of consciousness states,
where there's waking,
there's dreaming,
there's altered states.
There's ceremony, which they go
into to connect with the planet
and other spirits.
And that's what I think is
coming back into the West,
because indigenous
cultures also have
a very firm understanding of
transitional times in our life
and of initiation.
So women have their
initiation with moon time
when they have-- the
menstrual cycle starts.
And it connects them to
the cycles of the moon
and to also their own
bodies and to other women.
And there's that
expansion of what it meant
to be a girl and to a woman.
With men, especially,
unless they
have specific men's
initiation ceremonies, which
indigenous cultures do,
men don't have that growth
understanding that they're
more than just young boys, who
are meant to stay on that
level of consciousness.
You have a duty to the tribe, a
duty to the women in the tribe,
and duty to the community
and a duty to the planet.
So these levels of intimacy
need to be actioned.
They need to be awakened in a
fully functional human being.
So indigenous cultures
have plant medicines
and certain initiation times to
bring people from teenagehood
into adulthood,
and to be an adult
and in many indigenous
cultures around the world
means to understand what
you're really embedded in.
And you're embedded in and not
separate from the earth, Mother
Gaia, we say in Western
sort of hippie speak.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>RAZAM: But it's like
to know that, then you
know right relationship.
And then you can
have relationship
with your peers, with your
community, with your tribe.
And it creates a much
more holistic culture
that can understand how plant
medicines like ayahuasca
and things like
that, how they can
be used as just one function
of an organic, holistic Gaian
society.
And I think that's
hopefully, potentially where
we're coming back into.
So the '60s, it was
a messy initiation,
but there wasn't
the elders, per se,
to give us the right
context of how to take it,
the right containers,
what to do with it.
You see, like it's the 50th
anniversary this year in June
of the summer of love, 1967,
and the great gatherings
of human beings in
Golden Gate Park.
And it's so funny.
I was in San Francisco
a few weeks ago,
but the local city council
was not giving them a permit
to have what they did as a
spontaneous demonstration
of the capacity of the human
experience in the '60s.
I don't know.
Rules and regulations
now can't do it.
>>REGINA: Oh, no.
I'm from San Francisco.
I was born there, and it's
changed a lot that way.
>>RAZAM: Right.
It's funny, right?
Well, this is the
culture of control.
But essentially, it was this
huge generational initiation.
And people say, oh, what
happened to the '60s?
It failed.
I don't think it failed.
>>RAZAM: No, it didn't fail.
It planted seeds.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
It planted-- what it was
meant to do was not form
the world in that generation.
It was meant to create
the seeds, which
would then be put into
the soil of culture
and would have these
changes that happened.
And then we've seen through
the '60s and the birth of what
it paralleled in the
psychedelic resurgence then,
it paralleled the start
of like the civil rights
movement, the women's movement,
the ecological movement,
and all these things weren't
necessarily caused by acid.
But it created conditions
of the time and the culture
that people could
think outside the box.
They were thinking holistically.
They were tuning into
different levels of reality.
>>REGINA: They were
rebelling against the effects
of industrialization and
modern industrialized
scientific materialism
type of world.
They had just started
rebelling against it,
because it didn't
feel good watching
the effects on their parents.
>>RAZAM: I know.
And you take a mind
expansion tool like LSD
or something like
ayahuasca or anything.
But as soon as you start
to re-sensitize and feel,
and then you look at your world
and see the horror of the way
things have been
constructed, how can you--
you can't turn back from that.
As a person who has
a conscience, when
you feel things once again,
then you have to act.
And that created a
shifting culture.
>>REGINA: It was
post-World War--
I mean it was
post-Vietnam War too.
That's not coincidental.
The drugs that were flooded into
this country from The Golden
Triangle was part of it.
The reaction to the
absurdity of war
through the lens of
that particular war
was our reaction to it.
Isn't it interesting--
problem, reaction, solution,
as they say?
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right?
And that was part-- that's
part of what stimulated it.
>>RAZAM: Here's the interesting
thing and part of my thesis
that we're starting to
explore in the show, "Shamans
of the Global Village," is
that essentially, we've had,
as you've said, this
disconnect from the earth.
And we've had generations
in the West, where there's
been no plant medicines.
And then all of a sudden, we
have a psychedelic revolution
in the '60s.
Then we have the
ecstasy revolution
in the '80s, which
helped open the hearts.
And then a generation later, we
have all different age groups
like not just
recreational teenagers
that might have been like in
the '60s with the hippies.
But we have men, women of
all socioeconomic groups,
of all age groups going down
to the jungles of the Amazon
to discover the plant
medicine, ayahuasca,
and what that can do for people,
how that can help with healing.
But on a deeper level, how
people are then reweaving
and reconnecting to the earth.
And then I see this like
intergenerational cascade,
which is happening
from the '60s, opening
the mind, ecstasy in the
'80s opening the hearts,
and now ayahuasca helping
to reconnect to spirit.
And it doesn't seem like
there's any coincidence there.
It's like one had
to happen before we
could have the
next one happening
and the stepping stone.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that is true.
And at the same time, you have
this punctuation in between,
which is very interesting.
You just brought it up yourself.
Because I remember when this
happened in the early 1990s,
that's when, really, I think
Starbucks went public, OK?
So you had this infusion
of the two-person household
in terms of income, right?
You had much more stress.
You had the influx of credit.
That's when credit really
became very available to people,
so people started going
into this manic mood.
They were spending beyond
their needs because
of easy, free credit just
being pumped in like heroin
into society.
>>RAZAM: That's a
very good analogy.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>RAZAM: And that's
essentially what it was.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so now you have people
that are on a different type
of treadmill.
It's going a lot faster.
In order to keep up with it,
you needed the appropriate drugs
to keep you in that space.
So during that period of time,
the '90s and the early 2000s--
again, we were talking
about this-- huge use
of recreational, upper middle
class in particular, cocaine,
even down to high
school and middle school
levels in the more well-to-do
schools, and also, caffeine.
So cocktail hour from
my parents' generation
gave way to having an extra
shot of espresso or hit
of cocaine on the way home
at the end of the day.
So you're talking
about putting people
into a major
sympathetic overdrive
in the nervous system, right?
So how do you come
down from that?
>>RAZAM: Well, like culture
itself, that's not sustainable.
>>REGINA: What's that do?
It's unsustainable.
It's a manic ride.
>>RAZAM: For the global economy
to grow every three months,
every quarter more
than it was before,
drawing upon the resources of
the planet, which is finite,
whose ecological
systems are in, like,
crisis point because
of what we're
doing with,
essentially, capitalism
or late stage capitalism,
which then also affects us
on the micro level personally.
As you say, we're
adrenally focused.
Our drugs and our
consciousness are
sort of revolving
around that as well.
And it's a planetary
battery farm.
>>REGINA: It really is.
>>RAZAM: What is it producing?
Where is the happiness?
Where is the spirit?
Not only can it
not continue, it's
totally decaying and fragmenting
[INAUDIBLE] in our generation.
>>REGINA: And it has
a long term effect.
You cannot burn the adrenals
at that rate and not have
a residue.
And one of the effects
is that it shuts off
connection from the
finer frequencies
and the finer strata
of consciousness,
because you're in
fight or flight.
You're in survival mode.
>>RAZAM: Imagine if-- I mean
this is the weird thing I think
is like--
in my experiences
of plant medicines,
one of the key things that
ayahuasca has shown me
isn't necessarily the
complete visionary component
and all this sort of like trippy
innerscape visionary stuff.
It's more this resensitization
to myself and to these feelings
of energy within myself
and these capacities
that the bluntness
of Western culture
and what we can bring to the
table when we turn up for work
or go to school or
engage with people
is a very narrow bandwidth
of the full spectrum
of human consciousness.
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
>>RAZAM: And when
I've experienced--
>>REGINA: Intentionally so.
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
When [INAUDIBLE]
experiences resensitization
with plant medicines, it
reveals, it cleans out,
and it shows me more
capacity within myself.
And then in that innate
endogenous natural capacity,
this God-given
capacity, I feel I
can connect more to the planet
and to nature and to the earth
and the wind and the sun and
the feeling and the intuition,
and there's different levels
of consciousness, which we
have had as a species before.
But we've fallen into
history, into his story.
And it's only 10,000
or so years old,
but we've obviously had
hundreds of thousands,
if not millions of years
of life on the planet.
And where I'm from
in Australia, I
have been very
privileged to have
had some discussions
with indigenous mobs,
of Australian Aboriginals.
And essentially, they say the
dream time is coming back.
It's something that
is, essentially,
a season of consciousness.
And because they have 80,000
years or more of an oral record
of understanding their culture
and the different world
ages within that,
they understand
that times come and go.
Cultures come and go.
And there's like seasons
of consciousness.
And in my explorations
over years
as I've become a public
commentator on, I guess,
the psychedelic culture
and now shamanic culture
and the interplaying
relationship of both of those,
I see that there's these
different cultural maps that
have been left behind by many
different world cultures--
the Inca, the Maya,
the Aztecs, the Dogon,
the Australian Aboriginals--
where they understand
that there's seasons
of time a world ages
according to their calendricals.
And my shorthand for it is it's
almost as if we've fallen down
into like one bar, like on
our phone of getting signal,
and that's been the last
2,000 years or so of history.
We've had one bar signal.
>>REGINA: Yeah, well, we've
been under total patriarchy
since then, for one.
>>RAZAM: I know, and I don't
think it's a coincidence.
But now we're coming back
up in the cycles of time,
and we've just-- the whole 2012
thing, which in the Mayans,
in their galactic
calendar, essentially,
were saying there wasn't 2012.
To them, that's just a Western
conceit of our calendar.
But to them, it was 0.0.0.0.0.
It was basically
the full culmination
of 26,000 years of their large
orbit of our solar system
around the galaxy.
>>REGINA: The baktun.
>>RAZAM: The baktun, yeah.
And we are now facing galactic
center, and at the center
of the galaxy, or
they believed was
what they called Hunab Ku,
the womb of the great mother,
which is a beautiful
linguistical explanation
for the energetics of what's
at the center of the galaxy.
>>REGINA: We are guests
on this great entity.
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
In 2002, NASA
discovered and confirmed
there's a black hole at
the center of the galaxy.
And I'm sure some of
the commentators who
have been working with Gaia,
the astrophysicists might say,
there's been so many beautiful
understandings in recent years
with astrophysics
and understanding--
>>REGINA: Black
holes not understood
as it was before, yeah.
It's a plenum.
>>RAZAM: Yeah, so the
majority of things
go and get sucked
into a black hole.
But around the event
horizon, it builds up
this charge of energy,
which it spits off
into plasma-wide
jets, galaxies wide,
and ignites space dust and
different components out there.
And birth stars, like they think
that the whole cyclic component
of how suns are born is from
the energetic contribution
of black holes.
So it's like the Maya were sort
of right that they do birth--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's wrongly termed.
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That's
what they discovered.
I mean, one of the
physicists I really
enjoyed about 15 years ago,
a man named Mark Cummings,
called it the black plenum,
because it's actually
the birth center.
It's where consciousness
meets with, you might say,
prima materia to start
bringing into manifestation
whatever the
dreamer is dreaming,
whether they're dreaming
of a new galaxy or cosmos
or whatever.
>>RAZAM: That is exactly
what my understanding
of what the Mayans said.
As well as being the
womb of the great mother,
it was the source
of consciousness.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RAZAM: In our galaxy.
So in our world age,
just astronomically,
we are now pointing
at galactic center.
And if that is the
source of consciousness,
well, we're going up
to four bar signal.
And so I think
everyone's feeling it.
And it's not just
about plant medicines
and shamanism and psychedelics.
There's this increased
interest in Western culture
in breath work, in
yoga, in meditation.
>>REGINA: Well, this is
where I was just going to go,
because in the '60s,
simultaneously,
it wasn't just LSD
that was happening
or pot that was
happening or beginning.
That was really
more in the '70s.
>>RAZAM: Eastern
mysticism came in.
>>REGINA: TM came in.
>>RAZAM: That's right.
>>REGINA: And I've
noticed something,
and it may have-- it may
be quite different now.
You may notice this.
Because of the phenomena we are
talking about a little bit ago
that people are on
adrenal overload, burnout,
they've cut off access to
their higher part, their higher
conversation, by and
large, as a result
of being under perpetual
stress, which will cut it off.
And they're now seeking things
that will help open them
back into that connection
with higher self, really.
As a result of that, people
kind of split to different ways,
run to different houses of
how they want to get back
into connection with self.
But what I noticed is
that, generally speaking,
you had more women that were
attending the breath work,
TM, and so forth.
And you had more
men that were going
the route of the
hallucinogens, by and large.
It was very much--
it's very interesting.
Look at that, though.
I mean if you're looking
at right, left brain,
dominant fun-- only dominant
function in a given time frame,
and we can switch.
But if you're looking
at left brain logic,
the way boys and
men have societally
been trained in
the Western world,
very clear analytical thinking.
Girls-- oh, you're going to be a
mother, whatever in times past.
But also, this more
permission to explore
all of the more artistic side
of our capabilities and such,
which men are often shut
down earlier in life on.
It's interesting.
Those two different capacities
chose two different paths
to try to access self again.
>>RAZAM: It is.
And holistically, everything's
all one in that whole system.
If you look at culture
as a whole system, all
the different species--
>>REGINA: But we're
out of balance.
>>RAZAM: But we
are out of balance,
and as we see in 2,000
years or more of patriarchy,
there's been this very
energetic around it,
which has accentuated
those adrenals
and those outward
manifesting things.
I think they say the unification
of the spiritual warrior
is potentially this inward
yin connection to source,
a connection to the
subtleties and feeling
with the outward projection of
energy and the worry in this,
potentially, male.
And of course, those
things can counterplay,
and we don't want to get
gendered and just rigid
in saying, you have
to be this or that.
But there is a polarity in life
and in nature and in energy.
>>REGINA: And everything.
>>RAZAM: Many, many
different aspects of reality.
But it's interesting, because
I guess if you go back
to the '60s, I would
say I mean generally,
from what I
understand, there was--
>>REGINA: Everybody smoked pot.
That was gender neutral.
>>RAZAM: Everybody smoked
pot, but there was also
maybe more of a cohesion
of it wasn't just
men doing psychedelics per se.
But in general, in the culture
in the last few decades,
you're right.
It does seem like
there's been a very top
heavy masculine influence in--
>>REGINA: Toward ayahuasca.
>>RAZAM: --exploring that
potential with psychedelics,
essentially, because
they went underground.
But I know there's
been a lot of work
in the community, psychedelic,
and now shamanic community,
who, not to balance it out,
but women stepping forward
and maybe being overshadowed
by the masculinity,
even in psychedelic
culture, which
is meant to be mind manifesting
and about expansion, but still
maybe had some patriarchal
value systems attached
to it within the culture,
within Western culture as it--
>>REGINA: Yeah, what
I've seen, though--
interesting, because
I told you off camera,
I can't take ayahuasca, because
I can't get in that position
physically.
I have a weird wiring system.
But the women I know
who have done it,
they never seem to have brought
back the same experience
that all the men
that I know that
took it seem to bring back.
>>RAZAM: Well, it's different.
It can be pretty subjective.
We could be getting into
rocky territory here.
>>REGINA: It's OK,
because it doesn't
have to be politically correct.
It's just an observation.
>>RAZAM: There's a bridge that's
been developing between what
we consider psychedelic culture,
and as we understand from '60s
on, psychedelics was the
term that was coined.
It means to mind
manifesting from psyche,
the Greek goddess of the mind.
And that was essentially
the man-made chemicals.
So in the '80s, they
coined this term entheogen,
which is from the Greek, to
invoke the divine within.
And it was not necessarily,
but it originally
was sort of put
around academically
to get over the stigma of the
'60s and the psychedelics.
But there's still
been a resurgence
in psychedelic culture and
usage and organizations
like MAPS, the Multidisciplinary
Association of Psychedelic
Studies, has been working
for the last 20 or 30 years
to bring back and to lobby
the FDA and the government
to work with these substances
in a medicinal way,
in a medical way.
And there were so many
studies done with LSD
in the '60s that
had amazing results
to help with recidivism
and habitual behaviors
and helping people in therapy.
There was the Good
Friday experiments
at John Hopkins that
worked on divinity students
in the '60s with psilocybin
from the magic mushrooms.
And it engendered a
mystical response in people
that, to this day, the placebo
effects from one group,
and the ones who had the
active dose say that--
and there were [? divinity ?]
students to be priests.
They said it was
still the one or two
most single peak experience of
their lives, that they had to--
>>REGINA: They were priests.
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: They were all male.
>>RAZAM: They were engendered,
and they were all male.
That's what I'm getting to.
So there was that.
They replicated those
tests in the naughts
and had very similar
follow-up effects.
But the psychedelic
culture is now
bridged into shamanic
culture, and they coexist,
and to some degree, psychedelics
are still more looking
at MDMA, LSD, things like that.
And maybe in some
of the FDA tests
and the organizations
like MAPS, they
might still call them
all psychedelics.
But since the '90s
or so, there's
been more people going down
to indigenous cultures,
experimenting, or exploring
the potentials of things
like ayahuasca.
There's many, many
different plant entheogens.
There's psilocybin
magic mushrooms,
which have been caretaken by
the Mazatec cultures of Mexico.
Maria Sabina, who was
the very, very famous--
I think she's like
the Virgin Mary
of the psychedelic culture,
because in 1955, Gordon Wasson,
who was an investment
banker with one
of the big, big firms, Stanley?
Stanley?
Morgan Stanley.
>>REGINA: Oh, Morgan Stanley.
>>RAZAM: He was like the vice
president of Morgan Stanley.
His wife was Russian,
and she was into--
she was a mycologist and
into mushrooms in general.
He was looking for
the origin of the soma
to be used in Greek culture
with the Rites of Eleusis.
So for 2,000 years
in Greek culture,
I mean one of the best
eons of modern democracy
and what we see is that we've
taken so much of modern culture
from in the West, Roman
and Greek culture.
They had a psychedelic
or entheogenic sacrament,
which they called
the kykeon, which
was an initiatory experience.
Mainly, they only
did it once, but it
was open to slaves, men,
and women across the board,
and it was something
which initiated them
into the understanding of
who and what they really are,
that initiation we were
talking about before.
And that was the
basis of what kept
Greek culture stable for so
long, and it's documented.
It's in the history books.
You can understand that.
So Gordon Wasson was
looking for something
like that or the soma,
which is in the Rigveda
and the Indian books.
He was looking for
something which
he thought was the mushroom
and could help understand
consciousness and these other
cultures that had come before.
He went down to Mexico
and met Maria Sabina,
and she introduced him to a
ceremony-- again, not just
the substance itself, but
the lineage and the idea
that you do these for healing.
And she talked to the spirits
in the mushrooms, not just
the substance itself and
the neurochemical effect,
but teaching the relationship
that this had a spirit in it.
She called it the ninos, the
little children, the mushroom
spirits.
Gordon Wasson and, of
course, unfortunately,
the history books
have since proven out
the CIA were funding his trips
down there looking for a truth
serum, working with LSD
throughout the '40s,
'50s, '60s, '70s, and
potentially, even onwards.
But the magic mushroom
came back into the West,
and that was on the front cover
of "Life" magazine in 1957.
And that, basically, started
the psychedelic revolution,
because then Timothy Leary
tried magic mushrooms in 1960,
and Richard [? Baron ?],, who
got him onto it from Harvard,
and they started working
with the magic mushrooms.
Of course, within two
years, all the LSD people
started to say, well, if
you like magic mushrooms,
why don't we look at LSD?
Timothy Leary started
working with LSD.
Other people in the culture
started all working with LSD
at the same time--
Ken Kesey, even like
Aldous Huxley, all
these very influential
people in the culture.
And LSD overtook
the magic mushrooms,
and it was from the
[? labels ?] of psychedelic.
But it started with a mushroom.
It started with an entheogen.
And so now the modern culture
is going back down to the
jungle working with psilocybin,
salvia divinorum,
San Pedro cactus,
but ayahuasca has really
become the predominant avatar
of the planetary intelligence
connecting with people.
>>REGINA: Well, going
back to mushrooms,
are you telling
me I did it wrong?
>>RAZAM: There's no wrong.
There's no wrong.
>>REGINA: At the
end of a ski day,
drank some in a
milkshake in Bar One
at Squaw Valley
bustling with people.
>>RAZAM: How was that for you?
>>REGINA: It was interesting.
It was actually interesting.
I hadn't tried it before, so
I didn't know what to expect.
>>RAZAM: Well, this
is the thing though.
>>REGINA: My knees
became rubber.
I only did it one other time,
because once it kicked in,
I couldn't move anywhere.
My knees wouldn't work.
>>RAZAM: I think
you're sensitive.
>>REGINA: I couldn't walk,
and the other thing--
but of course, you know, the
love filter, which is like
if I have a cocktail
or something, love just
starts pouring out.
You just want to, I love
you and you and you.
>>RAZAM: Well, you think
that the legacy of--
>>REGINA: But I sat there
for four hours not able
to get off the stool,
because I couldn't walk.
And the same thing happened
the next time, which
was in the basement of
the Deutsches Museum
down where the tar baskets and
cutaway of submarines were,
ground floor.
Same thing-- sat
there the whole--
most of the afternoon
I couldn't move.
>>RAZAM: The best
place is nature.
Right?
>>REGINA: OK.
>>RAZAM: Because
Timothy Leary brought
this idea of set and setting.
He had the famous turn
on, tune in, drop out.
And it did what it did.
But one of his
other key things was
the idea of set and setting,
that it's your mindset
and how you feel when you
take a mind-expanding thing
or an entheogen or
things like that,
and it's the context
you do it in.
So if you do it at a
noisy club, rave, inside,
and with other people
around, as your sensitivity
and your capacity to get
full spectrum consciousness
starts to expand, you're
going to get all this energy
from all people.
And you might not
want that energy.
It's like, oh,
not only do I have
to deal with expanded
consciousness.
Now I have to deal without being
able to read the body language
and almost telepathy
with all these people
and keep it together and make
out that I'm still the same.
And if you're just in
nature, nature is the mother.
I mean don't be around people.
If you are going to--
>>REGINA: I didn't mind.
I just loved all of them more.
>>RAZAM: Well, that's good, too.
But it's so much better to
do it in a context of set
and setting.
>>REGINA: Sure.
It makes total sense.
>>RAZAM: And this is, again,
the thing which didn't transmit
from the '60s--
I mean the best--
Harvard had their
stream, and then
they wanted to make it more of
a religious stream of doing it
in concert with meditation,
experimentation,
and Tim Leary went
very religious.
Ken Kesey, who's a big hero of
mine, took it to the masses.
And they did have
a set and setting,
but essentially, they
reinvented or reinterpreted
the tribal ritual, the archaic
revival of strobe lights,
the party, the altered
states, and the ritual
of the group mind
and of the tribe.
And that was really important.
A lot of people
criticized Ken Kesey
for just that seeing it
as more recreationally,
but it was a container, and
it was a tribal ceremony.
It didn't have the rigorous
structure and support
mechanisms that, perhaps, modern
ayahuasca culture does have,
but it did transmit that
idea and make it popular
and transmitted.
I don't think
there's any wrongs.
I think everything--
>>REGINA: Because
it was popular,
though, everybody
just tapped into it
the way they wanted
to with their friends
wherever they were.
>>RAZAM: And then it did become
more recreational and diluted
and underground.
>>REGINA: It was
totally recreational.
>>RAZAM: But at the
peak of the '60s,
it was a planetary initiation.
And I believe it changed
the course of history
in so many ways,
that LSD essentially
acted as a psychic lubricant.
And back in the '50s,
when it was legal,
it was being used
around Palo Alto, which
is now called Silicon Valley.
And it was used by all different
people in corporations,
in computing, in all
these different industries
to stretch their consciousness.
>>REGINA: Was it used by SRI
and some of the other agencies?
>>RAZAM: I think so.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because
that's why they were
down there studying it, right?
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: They were
looking-- and again, you
don't need any of it to do
remote viewing and all of that.
But I can see where
you could take someone
that has potential, and
then, perhaps, expand
their capabilities by using.
>>RAZAM: But you know what?
If you think of what--
>>REGINA: SRI stands
for Research Institute,
Russell Targ, the
training of CIA spies.
OK.
That's what we're talking about.
Remote viewers.
>>RAZAM: Well, there was
that-- we haven't even
got into MK Ultra, which
is pretty documented.
>>REGINA: No, we can get into
that, because my audience is
familiar with all this.
I just wanted to
bring it up that I
do believe these
worlds interfaced.
>>RAZAM: They did.
I have these questions a lot
about psychedelic culture.
I mean why--
I mean the CIA were
basically looking
from the late '40s onwards for
a truth serum or something that
could give them a one up
over the enemy, the Russians
or whatever.
But essentially, you read
books like "Acid Dreams."
It's a really good biography
of the history of LSD.
There's a few others
out there as well.
And they really document
the role of the CIA
in bringing LSD to
the masses, and they
were giving it to
the psychiatrists
and psychologists.
And they were turning people on.
Aldous Huxley and
all people like
that were turned
on by people, who
had the connections to
those deeper levels.
But they were essentially
using it as a mind-expanding
or creativity tool.
And the thing about corporate
America in the '50s--
imagine-- I call it the white
picket fence 1950s Americana
mentality.
You've gone through the
horrors of World War
II and this cultural
reconditioning.
>>REGINA: You just
want to feel safe.
>>RAZAM: Well, suburbia
was essentially
invented to really bring people
in on that level afterwards.
And all these sort of
political machinations of,
what do we want culture to be?
How's it going to look like?
How are we going to into it?
But how do you change
the consciousness
of people from one--
you go from agrarian to
industrial to suburban.
There's all these
different phase
changes between how we live in
different cultural contexts.
And not only that, you look
at the inventions of things
that were coming through.
So you have radio, you have TV,
and then you have computing.
And to go from a
linear consciousness--
this is the key, I think-- to
go from a consciousness, which
understands linear time,
to a consciousness, which
can understand computing and
that sense of ones in binary
and ones in naughts and almost
like quantum levels of things.
We're not saying
like LSD directly
created the computer
revolution or the internet
or different things like that,
but for many people involved
in those industries,
who were using it,
and there's documented
usage in their fields,
I think it helps stretch
their psychic envelope
to understand--
I mean look what we have now.
We have a non-linear
appreciation
of what reality can be.
We have a distributed
consciousness,
where we can have 5,000
people in a Facebook feed.
We're in a feed, and we're like
grazing like digital telepathy
on all these people.
Or we have cloud
computing to upload--
it's almost like
the Akashic records.
We can understand
information, and we're not
trapped in this linear
consciousness, which
is, I think, the
legacy of the '60s that
is quite underappreciated.
We stretched our capacity
to think differently.
We won't even mention Steve
Jobs and Bill Gates taking acid
in the '70s.
But I mean this is the real
key to think differently.
So now we see
microdosing is hugely
popular with psychedelics again,
and all mainstream media is
starting to report on it and how
to optimize our own capacities
without going to a deep
psychedelic experience.
>>REGINA: Well, let me
ask you this question,
and I've already
touched on it before.
Some of the curanderos
that you met
with when you did your "Aya,"
your film on ayahuasca.
>>RAZAM: We haven't
even got into that yet.
>>REGINA: No, we're going
to get into all that.
We have time still.
But they said that many of them
don't use-- they're trained.
They're trained to see.
So they can see into you.
They can see into a person
having the experience
and guide them, because they
can see where they've ended up
and where they're going.
But they themselves
often don't use,
whether it's ayahuasca or
the toad medicine or whatnot.
>>RAZAM: So essentially,
I went down to the Amazon
in 2006 to look at this
mythic role of the archetype
of the shaman and
what that really
meant in modern culture
because of this indigenous sort
of archetype; we'd
killed all our shamans,
and what was this rise in
popularity of ayahuasca.
So ayahuasca is a concoction.
It's a brew that is drunk
made from the ayahuasca vine,
the Banisteriopsis
caapi vine, which
contains harmine and
harmaline, and [INAUDIBLE]
to plants like chacruna,
which contain DMT.
Now DMT is getting
a lot of interest
these days, because it occurs
endogenously in our brains,
and Rick Strassmann, who I
think's been on your show
before, he did the legal test
over 20 years ago now looking
at DMT, smokable DMT
on its own and what
the effects of consciousness
are in human beings.
You know, it hasn't been
concretely proven, but what
people like to sort of--
>>REGINA: We call it the
God-- spirit molecule, right.
>>RAZAM: We think it's
intimately tied to the dreaming
process itself and going over
into that realm, but also,
at peak experiences like birth,
death, near death experiences,
when we have potentially what
we could call another paradigm
in mystical experiences,
the neurological responses
involving DMT--
it's very intimate in
the consciousness itself.
So the shamans of the Amazon--
and they don't call
themselves shamans.
All around the world, indigenous
cultures have medicine people,
and they might--
in Peru, they call themselves
curanderos from the Spanish
to cure or to heal.
And they work.
There's vegetalistas, who work
with many different plants.
There's perfumeros, who
work with flower instances.
There's ayahuasceros, who work
specifically with ayahuasca,
to vaqueros, who work
with the power of tobacco.
And in the West,
this is the thing.
For 500 years or more, as we
went over to the old world,
and we discovered
tobacco, and we discovered
all these other
mind-altering plants,
we have taken what was sacred,
and we've made it profane.
So today, tobacco is
used without intent.
Tobacco is one of the original
power plants, the master
plants, and the
spirit, they believe
in an indigenous Peruvian
cosmology in South America,
mostly indigenous tribes.
They believe that it's
almost like an animus thing,
that everything has a spirit,
especially all the living
things.
And we have
relationships with them.
So when we take these plants
like tobacco or ayahuasca,
we're entering
into a relationship
with the spirit in
the plant, not just
the chemical and the effect.
And so when we smoke
mapacho cigarettes
in ceremony with ayahuasca,
mapacho is a nicotina rustica.
It's an indigenous strain
of tobacco, 19% nicotine.
It's very pure, and I can't
smoke Western cigarettes,
but in ceremony, when
you smoke a mapacho,
you put your intent in the
breathing out of the smoke.
It's creating like a
carrier wave for you
to put your prayers into the
ceremony using the mapacha--
much more beautiful way.
So when you're smoking,
it's opening up the nicotine
receptors, but you're
doing something
with your consciousness
and the relationship
with the medicine of tobacco.
Similar with ayahuasca, what
I learned is that the shaman--
there's two main areas--
Pucallpa and Iquitos
in Peru, that
have become very
famous for ayahuasca,
what some people call
ayahuasca tourism.
I like to think of it more
as a pilgrimage and seekers
that are going
down to reconnect,
to learn, to heal, to
work on themselves.
And it's not just a
recreational pursuit.
Basically, I interviewed many,
many different curanderos,
and they said, look,
some people come down.
They have a physical
ailment, and ayahuasca's not
like this pill you
can take, and it will
cure everyone the same way.
It's a relationship you go into
with the spirit of ayahuasca,
what they call
madre, or the mother,
the mother spirit of ayahuasca.
And also, it is usually
used in concert with dietas,
with going down for
larger periods of time.
And as part of the diet to
increase your sensitivities so
that ayahuasca can work
on you, you give up,
or you make a
sacrifice of things
that are more toxic in our diets
or create more impediments--
sugar, salt, oil, red meat,
alcohol, and sex as well,
right?
Because all of these things are
affecting our energetic bodies,
so originally, what
they're essentially saying
is the fullness and the full
capacity of the human organism,
like babies when they're
born, is to be so sensitive.
They are connected to nature.
They are connected to energy.
They can feel all the
way back to divine source
the manifestation
and the connection,
and that's what
we're meant to be.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>RAZAM: But in
Western cultures,
essentially, we have created
energetic blocks as well as
a reinforcement of
the patriarchal egoic
consciousness, all of
which retard our ability
to tap into our full potential.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
there's another area.
Often, in their own traditions,
these particular substances
were used to almost as--
what do you call it--
like exorcisms, to rid
the being of attachments
from other realm beings.
And to me this is a really
critical part of the story.
It's called vine
of the dead soul.
>>RAZAM: Yeah.
Well, these are two things.
Vine of the dead or
of the ancestors.
>>REGINA: Yes.
But let's look at
that in general,
because the kind of
experiences people relay
often has to do with entities.
They can see and sense and
feel the presence of entities
from another realm.
One would, if
you're going to look
at it in metaphysical
terms, would probably
call that the astral realm.
This is where beings who
haven't transitioned over
are still in existence.
They're still hanging out there.
That would make
total sense to use
that to help scoot away beings
that are attached to a person
and disrupting their lives.
In fact, just as an
aside, years ago, I
had a little
hypnotherapy clinic,
so I worked with people
at a pretty deep level.
And I had a really avant garde,
spiritually-based teacher
for that process, that
certification, unusual
that way.
And he always explained
that if you're
looking at addictions
within the human,
you can almost
always find beings
in the astral realm attached
to them that are surfing off
of their energies.
You have to break the
connection of the spirits
from the person to
stop the addictions
in a lot of the cases.
And I did find that was true.
But here, you're going
into the realm of it
with the vine of the dead soul.
>>RAZAM: True.
So you know what's interesting?
It's like we didn't
really believe
there were viruses or
microbacteria, because we
didn't have the tools to see
until the microscope and things
like that.
And we had superstitious
beliefs, even
in medicine and science,
a few hundred years ago
of what was causing
these things,
because we didn't
really understand
the ecology of what we're really
in, only what we could see.
And so what I think is happening
with the shamanic world view
is that we're learning to
receive, to open up to a deeper
perception of energy, and
that the energetic ecology
of the physical
world doesn't stop
at the baseline physical world.
It goes into
energetic frequencies
of what we could call the astral
or what, in physics terms,
we might call hyper
dimensions like the Michio
Kaku says it's twelve
hyper dimensional levels.
>>REGINA: You can
call it hermetics.
Call them realms.
They are all different
names for these substrata
bands of frequencies.
>>RAZAM: Energy isn't
created or destroyed,
and it continues to radiate
in different levels of this.
But we just can't see them.
So we're getting--
>>REGINA: So ayahuasca
helps open you
into those other realms.
>>RAZAM: So here's
the thing, yeah,
to finish off that other
bit is that many people were
coming down for healing and
working in concert with diets
and other plants and to
cleanse their bodies to open up
their full potential.
And then once we're
healed and cleaned,
we're receiving four
bar signal, and we're
living in concert in right
relationship with the earth,
and it's our full
human birthright.
But he said that the
majority of people--
this is what the
curanderos told me--
were coming down
with a sickness that
wasn't necessarily physical.
It was a disconnection from
themselves and from feeling
like they belonged.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Now you were one of them.
You were feeling
kind of lost yourself
when you first took
this journey, right?
>>RAZAM: You know, in
the traditional narrative
structure, you're meant to
go down and be wounded and be
healed.
I didn't quite fit that,
because I'd also had--
>>REGINA: Were you just
seeking, kind of lost in it?
You were seeking.
>>RAZAM: I was
definitely a seeker.
We were talking about
psychedelics before.
But I had my initiations with
psychedelics in my late teens
or actually in my early 20s.
But I've always be
interested, I guess,
in the shamanic and
psychedelic and potential
outside the mainstream culture.
So I think I'd had
initiations, and then
when shamanism started
to surface on my radar,
I went down there.
But you know what?
You're right, because
what really happened
was that I reconnected.
And even though
I didn't realize,
I didn't feel like
I was wounded,
I did have the traditional
Western disconnection
of what I believed in
in my mainstream, what
I believed was possible.
And belief is the intellect
and the ego thinking,
when the heart
feels, that's when
the true wisdom and
the true medicine is.
So many people who go down
and work with ayahuasca,
it can be working--
they say it's
the equivalent of like 10 years
of psychotherapy in one night.
And again, it's very
different for many people.
It's not like the Western drug.
It's all the same, because
it's the relationship.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it seems everybody
has a different experience.
>>RAZAM: But it's essentially
about getting to know yourself.
We know that with science
and doing the MRI scans,
we know the default
mode network goes off.
It's almost as if the
subconscious mind comes
up more, so any traumas or
wounds or energies you're
carrying, you can't escape
it, and it comes up.
And you get to sort through
stuff like in psychotherapy.
But you get to feel it from
another vantage point, where
you're not attached to
it and let go of it.
>>REGINA: Well, you had
electrodes attached to you
when you were detaching.
>>RAZAM: Oh, you saw my film?
>>REGINA: Yes, of course.
I watched it.
I took good notes.
But in any event, so
let's talk about that.
>>RAZAM: That was atypical.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but let's talk
about that and what happened.
But let's also talk about
what the EEG was picking up.
>>RAZAM: Well, here's the thing.
The majority of people who go
down into ayahuasca culture,
and more and more in the
last 20, 25 years or so,
there's more lodges being
set up for people going down
in the West.
There are teething issues
around supply and demand
of the medicine and
more money going down
to there and shamans
and ethics and conduct.
But essentially, if you're
in the right container
and the right space,
you are going to have--
it's not just a
mind-opening experience.
It's a heart-opening experience.
So basically,
literally about a week
into my first three-month foray
into South America experiencing
ayahuasca, I was about
three or four ceremonies
in to resensitizing
to myself and
to the planetary intelligence,
the Gaian mind, mother nature,
and getting it, like
really getting it,
and being in this hyper
journalistic mode of writing it
all down and almost
essentially channeling
like I'm not thinking.
I'm feeling, and I'm in
these fresh experiences,
and I'm going through these
states of reconnection
with the planet.
And lo and behold, I
met Dr. Juan Acosta,
who is a trained
electroencephalography
practitioner.
>>REGINA: So he hooked you
up, electrodes everywhere.
>>RAZAM: He was working with
Ron Wheelock, the gringo
shaman of Iquitos.
And we were working
with synthetic 5-MEO-DMT
on plant materials
infused on that,
which was legal at the time.
5-MEO-DMT is sometimes
in ayahuasca brews.
Some tribes in
Ecuador and Colombia
use it in their yage brews,
their name for ayahuasca.
So the NN DMT we
were talking about
before with Rick
Strassmann, that
has the visionary component.
And the reason why so
many people, I think,
were going down to the West
to reconnect with ayahuasca,
they wanted--
they call them the
vision seekers.
They wanted to see.
They wanted to feel, because
their intellect in our culture,
if you see it, you
believe it, right?
And in the indigenous
curanderos,
they used to drink ayahuasca
on behalf of their patient,
and the patients
wouldn't take ayahuasca.
They didn't need to see,
because the shaman would
do the work on them, and
he would energetically--
>>REGINA: Probably
dislodge whatever entities
were hanging on and so forth.
>>RAZAM: Whatever was in them,
whatever [INAUDIBLE] in them
in the energetic ecology.
But the Westerners came
wanting the visions,
and they wanted the
visions, because they
wanted to prove
to their intellect
that something was really
true with going on here.
But then what they
found was that they
were feeling and
reconnecting, and it
was opening up all these
worlds of feeling and capacity.
So a week into that
experience myself, I
encountered 5-MEO-DMT with
this rogue neuroscientist
on the frontiers
of consciousness
hooking me up to a 19-channel
electrode cap with wet gel,
putting the blindfold on,
meditating, smoking 5-MEO-DMT,
and firing me what I call
into the mind of God.
Like I mean, this gets
to the edge of language
and to the bits where
whatever words I say
are going to have
triggers for people.
>>REGINA: Well, you didn't
have a lot of words.
>>RAZAM: Well, I brought
back a lot of words.
It's a whole
chapter in the book.
>>REGINA: But in
the experience, it
was hard to articulate
while you were [INAUDIBLE]..
>>RAZAM: It's very
hard to articulate.
So what I've really
understood in recent times
that there's a
gradiation of energy,
and I've been getting
into more Sanskrit
culture and their
maps of consciousness
and Samadhi states.
And they've left this... them
and like the Buddhist culture
idea of the bardo states.
So there's this
beautiful little quote.
I might be paraphrasing,
but it says
there's 50,000 levels of
Maya between you and God,
but none between God and you.
So if you say deep
source or Samadhi state
or the field or the force
or whatever language
you have to describe this
oceanic reunification
with the very presence
of creation itself,
that is where 5-MEO took me,
and in most people's reports,
it takes them.
Now the interesting
thing about 5-MEO-DMT,
it is in some ayahuasca brews.
The Secoya in
Ecuador, they say they
were given the knowledge of
their yage brew a 5-MEO in it,
in their plant, their
[INAUDIBLE] plant,
from the star people who
live inside the light.
And there's different
levels within which
I found in the experience of
5-MEO, it opens and flowers
and reveals.
Most psychedelics, when
you're on them or entheogens,
you're on the thing, and it's
interfacing with the spirit
of the plant with you.
But there's still an ego.
There's still you.
On the 5-MEO
experience, it reveals
that the ego is just the
clothes that you're wearing,
and you are that thing.
You are that which is.
And it gets mystical,
and it gets religious,
and there's no
other way to say it.
>>REGINA: Well, sure.
Of course.
I mean theoretically,
that's where it should go.
But what did it look
like on their end of it
with the graphs?
>>RAZAM: So yeah, the
data is available.
We've got the data up there
on one of our websites.
>>REGINA: Because it
wasn't in the film.
The data wasn't in the film.
>>RAZAM: No, because we
had a nine-minute sequence,
which was--
I mean, again,
I've been filming--
attempting.
So this was actually
the centerpoint
of what became the film, "Aya--
Awakenings," based
on my book "Aya--
Awakenings."
And so it's about ayahuasca,
but it's also about awakening,
because what happened to me
was just 5-MEO experience,
and it's [INAUDIBLE].
>>REGINA: What's that look
like on the brain map?
>>RAZAM: On the
inside or the outside?
So on the brain map--
>>REGINA: No, on the
brain map on the outside,
then on the inside.
>>RAZAM: Well, the
problem is in 2006,
the 19 channel signals and
what you could measure,
if you have a movement
of jaw or eyelids,
it creates artifacts on the
EG readings, which are--
they're going through
the skull, and they're
reading your brain waves.
They have to go
through the skull.
>>REGINA: You had all the
portions of your brain wired?
>>RAZAM: Right.
Wired up to a computer,
[INAUDIBLE],, in meditation
pose, and I'm going in.
So we recreated in
the film what that
looks like, and
essentially, it's
the white light
mystical tunnel, which
I call like the super Hadron
Collider of hyperspace.
It's just you're going in
and in, and it's coming,
and it's revealing that Rumi,
the poet, the Persian poet,
has the most accurate quote.
He says, "The drop
rejoins the ocean."
And think about it.
Individuated consciousness--
you think you're an individual,
and then you go through
this experience, where
the cohesion of the
individuality wall falls away,
and you realize
you are the ocean.
And this is the most mystical
and profound and loving state.
It's like unconditional love.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
You were seemed like you
were definitely blissed out.
Again--
>>RAZAM: And so on the outside--
>>REGINA: Yeah, what'd it
look like on the outside?
>>RAZAM: On the
outside, what it shows
is this body going through this
like spasm, this God spasm.
>>REGINA: Oh, forget that
part, the science of it.
>>RAZAM: The brain wave--
that's what I'm
trying to tell you.
It's such a powerful effect
that it corrupted the data
to a certain degree.
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
>>RAZAM: What he
managed to get was--
>>REGINA: Was it almost
like an electrical explosion
or something?
>>RAZAM: What he managed to
get while I was still was
essentially--
and I've been in
concert with Dr. Juan,
and so in 2015, Dr. Juan--
he stayed with me.
And so Dr. Juan and
I founded an NGO,
a 501(c)(3) called the
Terra Incognita Project.
It means the invisible
landscape, that of the mind.
And the neuroscience has caught
up with different EG helmets.
Now we can actually get
more accurate readings
of what's going on,
and we can cancel out
the other facts of the data.
>>REGINA: Because you're
using an actual helmet,
so it's keeping the
electrodes in place.
>>RAZAM: It can get
wet or dry, and you
can get wireless
helmets, and there's
better extraction algorithms
for extracting out the data.
But essentially, not just
what he discovered then,
but what I've been
keeping up with
and what our NGO has
discovered working
with another
neuroscientist, Dr. Michael
Villanueva in San Diego--
we go over to Mexico to
do the legal research,
because it's still legal
in Mexico and in Canada
and many other countries
around the world.
Essentially, the
5-MEO experience can--
the frontal lobe cortex
of the brain flatlines.
You almost like--
>>REGINA: Cognitive
processes are not happening.
>>RAZAM: The ego goes.
And remember that in the
last 10,000 years of history,
ego is what's created the
planetary emergency we
have now.
It's created the catastrophe of
all the isms and the structures
we've done.
>>REGINA: The frontals
has done that.
>>RAZAM: And so when the ego
fully goes down, what is left?
It's the brain at large.
And the brain at large
or the mind at large,
as Aldous Huxley said, it
gets full spectrum signal
like 10 bar signal.
And that's all there is.
But the cumulative effects
after the peak experience
are both cohesion between
left and right hemispheres
of the brain,
increased optimization,
but also, some very
interesting things.
We have alpha beta gamma
delta states of mind,
and so beta's problem-solving,
alpha is like alienating.
Theta and delta are getting
two more mystical dreamlike
or altered states.
>>REGINA: And then
there's gamma,
which the Tibetan monks reach.
>>RAZAM: This is the thing.
So gamma is cohesion,
and gamma's only
been able to be identified
in the last 20 years
as the precision of the
equipment's gotten better.
So it's some sense of cohesion.
So gamma seems to be
the alpha, and then this
is only in some of
our preliminary data.
So we can't take it
across the board.
It's still to be peer reviewed,
which we're aiming towards,
and we're looking
for more funding
to do this neuroscience work.
But it seems to be, it's
almost as if alpha and theta go
into cohesion as
well, and gamma,
which normally lasts
for milliseconds,
goes into cohesion for
like minutes at a time.
And it creates a unity state.
And we don't really know.
We haven't got the hard
science on this yet.
>>REGINA: But they have
measured Tibetan monks
that are lifelong meditators.
>>RAZAM: And they go into gamma.
>>REGINA: They go into gamma.
>>RAZAM: And so I've
been working with getting
into the toad medicine now.
So I was working with ayahuasca
for seven, eight years,
and then integrating
my experiences
into the book and
the film, "Aya--
Awakenings," which is
on the Gaia catalog.
And then at the
apex of that, when
it was like that
spiritual path of holding
that space for that story,
when that was finished,
within nine months, I
then started to-- well,
I was introduced to Dr.
Octavio Rettig, who's
a Mexican doctor, who works
with the Sonoran Desert toad,
the bufo alvarius toad, which
contains 5-MEO-DMT, which
is the same material in an
organic extract from the toad,
which is what I had in 2006,
which you see in the film.
We're talking about
this deep experience.
So I'm really
putting it together
and understand there's
no coincidence in this.
As I started to have the
experience of 5-MEO-DMT
from the bufo
alvarius toad, and I
wasn't running to go
back there, because it
was such an
all-encompassing, ego
deaf unification
with great source
that I was just like mindblown.
And it took a lot to integrate.
But then I started to see
that this medicine-- not just
ayahuasca, but there's many
different plant entheogens.
As I said, the idea of the
ceremony and the structure
and the ritual has been
coming out to the West
alongside ayahuasca.
So people just see
ayahuasca, but this ceremony
and the ayahuasca
circles and the ritual
and the songs and the
connection between the planet
and the indigenous
cultures and now
this modern wave of
shamanism, as we document
shamans and global village.
So I worked with
Dr. Octavio Rettig,
and we're working with the
Sonoran Desert toad, which
is a smokeable 5-MEO-DMT, again,
from the toad, fully organic,
and you go back into
these 5-MEO states.
And is all I can say.
I mean you go to these states
of unity consciousness, which
are both incredibly
profound and healing.
And as we know a bit of
the science into gamma
and into cohesion, and it feels
to me when the ego flatlines--
this is my conjecture from the
science we've been getting--
is that the network of
the brain goes down.
The fully frontal lobe goes
down, and what remains?
What remains of the other
brains, the three brains
that we have--
the stomach brain with the
microbacteria and the instinct,
and the heart with
the neuronal cells.
The older networks
we had before, we
came into egoic
consciousness, remain
to pick up the
full spectrum unity
state of the 5-MEO experience.
And in that state, there is
the most enormous information
reservoir and
loving intelligence.
And this is Nick Cave's song.
It's like I don't believe
in an interventionist god.
I mean think about it.
All through history, the
mystics spent all their time
connecting to God, and to
go up into a Samadhi state
and to realize the oneness
and unity of everything.
And when you get
there, you realize
that God spends all its
time to come down here
and to incarnate as
manifestation in the world.
It's this two-way street.
So it's crazy, but
those pathways,
once they're awakened,
really remain awakened,
because we can obfuscate
them, and they're still
filtered by the ego.
But I feel that the difference--
and we're talking about
the psychedelic revolution
and the shamanic resurgence--
I really feel that's
a stepping stone
from planetary
Gaian intelligence
and behind planetary Gaian
intelligence, deep source,
in training us to be
ready for full spectrum
consciousness, which we
have had in the dream time,
as the Aboriginal Australians
say, in these different world
ages before.
So we've had to have the
psychedelic experience come out
of the labs, because we were
so distanced from the garden
and from indigenous cultures
that William Burroughs ran
screaming from the
ayahuasca experience
back in the 1950s, because
he wasn't ready for it.
And white picket
fence America wasn't
ready for the jungle and
the entheogenic experience.
But we had to go
through the '60s
and the psychedelic
experience stretching
our minds and the
psychic lubricant,
and then the ecstasy revolution,
and then the plant medicine
renaissance to be
ready for the light,
for the 5-MEO-DMT, which
is endogenous and is in us.
We are the medicine that
the planet is revealing.
>>REGINA: And it's only
revealing us to us, really,
the highest aspect of what
we are and expressed out
into the cosmos.
It's connected to all.
>>RAZAM: Each of the species
are playing a role in the Gaian
matrix within the hole,
and I think it's--
I call it the orgasm
of the species.
There's a peak moment.
I think we're coming up to this.
>>REGINA: So let
me ask you this.
Has anyone on any
of these experiences
come upon, while they're under
the influence, so to speak,
and in the experience,
come upon the experience
of a punishing god reading
off lists of commandments
and so forth to them?
>>RAZAM: If that's their
imprint, go for it.
>>REGINA: I just wanted to see.
But that's not usually what's
going to happen, right?
>>RAZAM: What you believe
to be true becomes
true to a certain degree.
Joseph Campbell called
them all the mass
of God, and all the different
religious structures--
>>REGINA: So
essentially, are people
then just-- they're
experiencing what
they expect to experience
through the lens of what
their own belief systems are?
>>RAZAM: There's two
components there.
Joseph Campbell had that
[INAUDIBLE] mass of God,
but Jung had the
idea of you've got
your consciousness
and your day residues
and then, perhaps, the
collective unconscious,
and then I think we have
like a species unconscious
and Gaian unconscious.
And there's different
chambers of drawing
upon different potentials
of information and energy
exchange.
So I think a lot of
people go through,
I've seen Jesus in ayahuasca.
He's my brother.
But he looked like 1970s
Jesus wearing flip-flops.
It feels like the
consciousness of ayahuasca
reads your data banks
and your culture banks,
and if it wants to help
invoke a loving situation,
it might draw upon
that archetype.
And if you need to experience
a vengeful Yahweh-type of God
scenario, OK.
But hopefully, it'll be done
in the context of letting
go of that and of healing and of
realizing that, then, oh, look,
you let go of that.
The clouds part.
The sun shines
through, and then you
might understand
there's a deeper
capacity to consciousness.
You get what you need,
but also, it doesn't stop.
We're all being entrained,
and it gives us as much
as you can handle for as
much as you can handle.
It stretches you each time.
>>REGINA: On that note,
we're out of time.
One final comment?
Anything you'd like to say
before I sign off here?
>>RAZAM: Love is all there is.
>>REGINA: Everything
else is illusion.
I think that was one
of David Icke's titles.
>>RAZAM: There you go.
>>REGINA: You're
absolutely right.
That's my experience too.
Thank you so much.
And good luck on all of your
research and upcoming projects.
>>RAZAM: Thank you.
Aloha.
>>REGINA: Again, the title
of the films are "Aya--
Awakenings" and "Shamans
of the Global Village"
here in the Gaia library.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."